Welcome.
Good afternoon.
Boy, these lights are horrible.
There's a lot of you here today
and I'm hoping that you have a good
time listening to this discussion.
The development tools are the key.
Development tools are what
will make Mac OS X successful,
will make your application successful,
and will get us all to the
place that we want to be.
So without further ado,
I want to introduce Dave Payne,
the manager of the
Development Environment Team.
Thanks, Jeffrey.
All right, great.
Okay, let's go ahead and get started.
So what we're going to take a look at
today is the power of Project Builder.
What you can do with it, how to do it.
So we'll go through a number of things.
Basically walking through all the
features of Project Builder for creating,
editing, and navigating your projects.
Take a look at source code management
from within Project Builder.
Configuring, building,
and debugging your targets
for building products.
And then, so a lot of what we're going
to do really is kind of walking
through a lot of the features,
make sure that you know what exists.
Maybe for those of you who've used it,
it's some review for some of that.
In this particular session,
more than most, or more than hardly
any in this conference,
we are going to be talking a
little bit about future stuff.
We will discuss what's new in
Project Builder on the developer tool
CD that you received when you registered
or when you walked in this morning.
And then, as I mentioned,
we'll talk about the future of
Project Builder to show sort
of where we're going with this.
So let's go ahead and get started
on what is Project Builder.
So Project Builder is our
integrated development environment
for Mac OS X from Apple.
With this, we build all of Mac OS X.
Carbon applications such as the Finder,
Help Viewer,
Sherlock are built with Project Builder.
Cocoa applications, our favorite,
Project Builder itself is
built with Project Builder.
Interface Builder, Mail,
the WebObjects tools,
a lot of very heavy use
of Cocoa within Apple.
There's a full Java 2 environment that
you can develop with Project Builder.
And now on the May 2001
Developer Tools CD,
you also have the ability to
develop WebObjects 5 applications.
So that's a lot of what
we've been doing for that.
You can develop Unix tools,
such as daemons server process,
you might want to build tools that then
you access from graphical applications.
You can build kernel
extensions and device drivers.
So really the whole spectrum of
everything that you can do with Mac OS X,
you can do it from Project Builder.
But a lot of times you don't
create source from scratch,
so there's a number of ways that
you can get source code into
Project Builder from other places.
And I'll talk a little bit
more about that later on.
So Project Builder is really the
centerpiece of our development
environment strategy at Apple.
It's your development hub.
We've been working very heavily
with a lot of other teams within
Apple to ensure that Project Builder
integrates well with those other
applications that others are working on.
So for instance,
we interface with Interface Builder,
which is our user interface construction
tool for Cocoa and Carbon applications.
You can hear a lot about that in
the next session in this hall.
New again on the May 2001
Developer Tools CD,
we integrate with WebObjects
Builder and EO Modeler,
and the WebObjects team will be showing
that off in a lot of their sessions
throughout the course of the week.
We also interact with
the WebObjects team.
So Project Builder integrates
well with the WebObjects team.
We've been working
very heavily with them.
So Project Builder integrates
well with the WebObjects team.
We've been working
very heavily with them.
interact with the file merge tool
for graphical comparison of files,
and with a lot of the performance tools
such as Object Alloc and Malloc debug.
So we have integration with
some of these at this point.
We intend to have further integration
with others as we move on in the future.
Plus,
there's some other things that we're
-- teams we're working with that
aren't yet depicted on this list.
So sometimes in the email lists
and other places people ask me,
so can I really use Project Builder
for my big applications?
And the answer is emphatically yes.
We use Project Builder for
over 250 projects that feed
into Mac OS X within Apple.
They are across the board from
applications to frameworks,
plug-ins for all the screen savers
and system preference panels,
all of our device drivers,
everything else goes
through Project Builder.
So it's really in very heavy
usage and that's great for us.
We really try to establish tight
feedback loops with those teams
so that if they have a problem,
we send people over,
we work with them to ensure
that we can solve those problems
and get developers past that.
And that helps us deliver a better
product for all of you as well.
Project Builder also really
facilitates team development.
It's pretty rare that you
have on a major application
just one person working on it.
So of course as you would expect.
There's preferences for the application.
But something kind of innovative,
every developer on a project has
their own user settings for that
particular project that's stored
within the project files directory.
It's one of our wrapped directories.
So each of you has a separate file there,
which means that with our
integration with source code control,
you can actually check the files.
Your settings files.
So you can delete the whole
project off the disk then.
And then six months later if you have
to come back and do some maintenance,
then all of your user
settings are still there.
So there's editor settings,
build settings,
and debugger settings are all
stored on a per user basis.
And we'll take a look at some
of those as we go through here.
So before I get into the
meat of the product itself,
I'd like to talk a little bit about
the evolution of Project Builder.
Where are we and how did we get here?
So we kicked this project off two
years ago in February of 1999.
The first code was written,
the first lines of code.
There were two engineers on
the product at that point.
It's been my pleasure to build the
team over the past couple of years,
transitioning people from
our older Project Builder WO,
older IDE, onto this and hiring
new people internally.
Steve Naroff mentioned this morning
in our tools overview that we're
continuing to heavily invest in tools.
We've actually had five
new engineers join the team
since February of this year.
There's other new employees
out in the audience.
Hi, welcome.
So I'm really looking forward
to the power of this team,
what we can do moving forward.
In February of 2000,
we started rolling it out with an Apple.
We had been using it before that,
but now we start asking
other people to use it.
The March 2000 version
that you got on the,
2001,
you got on the developer tools CD and
the original Mac OS X is our version 1.0.
It's a fully usable product.
You can use it for all your development.
But again,
we've got our first up to date version.
So we're going to get into the
first update here in May 2001.
The WebObjects 5 support,
but there's a number of other
general purpose fixes as well.
And we are going to be
doing new improvements,
new releases on a regular
basis for the product.
So you should see things
coming out well for us.
Okay, so now let's go ahead and
start taking a look into the
product itself with creating,
editing, and navigating projects.
So to help me do that,
I'd like to bring on stage Mike Ferris,
who now works for me as the manager
of the Project Builder team itself.
So I have the Project Builder team,
the compiler team,
debugger and performance tools,
and a QA and integration team.
So Mike and I have been
working together for a while.
We're going to do a walkthrough of
the features of Project Builder.
So the way we're going to do this...
If we can go ahead and have
a demo on the other screen.
Now for those of you sitting in
the far wings of the audience,
you may want to move in a little bit
because we are going to do slides
on one screen and demo on the other.
So let's take a look at the
overall user interface first.
So we've got a project window open here.
On the left side of the window
are the project structure panes.
So this is where we keep information
that's stored on disk about
the structure of your product.
So the groups and files
outline is first shown.
Below that we've got bookmarks for
navigating through your project,
then targets to represent
your build products,
and then breakpoints for debugging.
On the right side of the window we've
got editor panes with a navigation
bar at the top of each editor pane.
We'll talk a lot more about that.
At the top of the window,
we've got a toolbar that's now
a configurable toolbar just
as in the Finder and in Mail,
and many of you may want
to take advantage of that
in your products as well.
This is using facilities
provided to us by Cocoa.
We'll be providing additional icons to
add more facilities to let you customize
your toolbar as you'd like over time.
If you bring down the tool panes here,
above the editor panes,
we've got tools for project-wide find,
for build output, for the console output,
input and output when
you're running a product,
and for the debugger.
How do we create a new
project in Project Builder?
So if we go up to the File menu and
bring up the New Project menu item,
we can see that the
New Project dialog comes up.
It's got a lot of different
project types listed here.
So applications, bundles, frameworks,
kernel extensions, and I/O Kit drivers,
tools, really everything that you
want to do on Mac OS X.
Within each of these, we have different
subsets of these as well.
So you can do Carbon applications
or Nib-based Carbon applications.
You can do Cocoa applications
or Document-based Cocoa apps if
you're using the NS Document model.
So sometimes we get the
questions on the list of,
"Gee,
this is my first experience with it.
I want to create a C++-based tool.
How would I do that?" Well,
maybe the C++ tool item is a good choice.
But let's go ahead and create a document.
a document-based Cocoa application.
[Transcript missing]
So taking a closer look at our
groups and files outline here,
we can see that this is just a
user-definable grouping of files.
If you have experience with our
previous version of Project Builder,
this is much more flexible now.
The files here are completely independent
of the physical location on the disk.
It's independent of any particular
restrictions of the build system.
So you can reorient
this however you want.
You can move files
around just by dragging.
You can select groups or files
and just delete them if you wish.
You can select multiple files and
put them into a new group through
the Project Group menu item.
Hey,
you can go back and ungroup it again.
So you can also add new files to
your project or add new frameworks,
so link against new frameworks.
To add a new file,
you can either go to the project menu
and use add file or add frameworks,
but you can also drag in from the finder.
So in this case,
we'll take an icon file and drag it into
our resources group here in our project.
Now when you add a file, it asks you,
do you want to copy this item into the
group or into your project hierarchy,
so if it's somewhere else on your system.
Typically,
you'd probably want to say yes.
It also asks you what targets
you want to add the file to.
So in this case, we only have one target.
If we add more,
you can choose to add it to multiple
targets right at that point.
So, among the other things that Groups
and Files Outline gives you access
to is you can navigate down into
your frameworks if you'd like to
take a look at what headers do I have
available to me in this framework.
So, this is one of the mechanisms
for getting to headers.
There's a number of others as well.
So, in this case,
we're navigating down into
the foundation headers.
So, we can see that those
come up in the editor,
a whole list of those.
Also, then,
this is especially interesting.
Besides frameworks,
we've also got your built products there.
So, we can see down here a products group
that Project Builder has created for us.
Well, that's interesting that
foo.app is shown in red here.
Now, that's because foo.app doesn't
yet exist on the disk because we
haven't built this project yet.
If I had a file that was deleted
from the disk or doesn't exist,
that would show in red as well,
and you might need to fix
up the reference to that.
But in this case,
we can fix up the fact that the
app doesn't exist by building it.
So, if you remember,
this was a Cocoa document-based
application that we had created.
And now we go off and build,
and the build tab came up
to show us the build output,
and we closed that back up.
Now we can go down into the products
group and navigate down in and
see the bundle contents here.
So, an application package on the build
tab is a package that we can build.
So, the package on Mac OS X is a bundle.
You've heard a lot about this.
You'll hear a lot more about it.
So, within here,
we can see the Info.plist.
So, we can click on that
and see the XML of that.
Project Builder took the information
that you had supplied in the project,
which in this case is default,
and created that for us.
We've got the Mac OS X directory that
the binary for Mac OS X is in here.
There's the pkg info
file that's necessary.
There's the pkg_finder_launch_services
to find this application
package as an application.
And then there's the whole
resources group as well,
with, in this case, English resources.
So, if you had your project localized
into multiple languages,
this is where you would see the .l
projects for your different languages.
So, we'll be enhancing this facility over
time to give you full inspection of
the built results of your project.
So,
you can envision things like the size.
The size of the binary and the groups
and permissions and things like that.
So let's take a look at some of
the capabilities of the editor.
So we'll go back to the more
complex Sketch project here
that we've already had open.
So Sketch is one of the
example projects for Cocoa.
It's an NS document based project
that's out in developer examples Cocoa.
So we can select a file and
we can see that we've got full
syntax coloring here in the file.
We can do things like splitting
the window by going up here to
the split bar or split icon.
We can resize each of the split panes.
We can create more if we want.
We can close up any
particular split panes.
Now a lot of people are looking for
more flexibility in the environment.
So what if I don't want to be
constrained inside that window?
Well you can bring up files in other
windows by just going and double
clicking in the outline view and now
it comes up in a separate window.
You've got all the same capabilities
here where you can split the editor pane.
Each of the editor panes has a
navigation bar here so you can
flip between different files,
show the same file,
different parts of the same file,
or you can show different
files in the same editor pane.
pain.
Some people occasionally ask us,
is there a facility for showing
what line number I'm currently on
or going to a specific line number?
So to go to a specific line number,
let's bring up the go-to line
menu item under the find menu.
And Mike,
what line number should we go to here?
Oh, I don't know.
How about 20?
Line 20.
Sounds good.
Okay, so we go directly to that.
Now,
also we find that if we keep that window
open and we move around between the file,
the auto-update is almost barely
visible on the screen up there.
So clearly this is an
opportunity for some future
improvements in the product here.
Now, when you're editing,
there's a number of different
parameters you can set for the
text settings of the files.
So we can do this by selecting a file and
then going up into the project menu doing
Show Info to bring up the file inspector.
So we can do things
like set the tab width,
set the indent width.
You can set the end of line characters.
So do you want to use the Mac end of line
carriage return character or do you want
to use the Unix end of line character,
which is a line feed?
And in the case of--
We've actually enhanced the preprocessor,
the compiler,
and the debugger to be able to
handle either of these properly.
But you may find that if you're going
to work with Unix tools with your files,
for example,
run Perl scripts across them to
look for word counts or something,
you might want to switch to using
Unix end-of-line characters.
You can also set the file encodings.
So let's say that you wanted to put kanji
comments into your source code files.
Well, we've got a whole set of
different file encodings here.
If you switch to UTF-8,
then you can represent Unicode characters
in files that can still be processed by
our compiler tool chain properly as well.
Go ahead and put all the kanji
comments in that you want.
Other capabilities from the
Inspector here is that you can change
the reference style for how we're
accessing this file on the disk.
So you might want to have the file be
relative to the group that contains
it in the Groups and Files outline.
So you can say that a group matches
up to a specific folder on the disk,
but you don't have to.
You can also have a file be relative
to the project that contains it,
or you can also say that
it's an absolute path.
So if you're going to be
moving a project around at all,
or moving it between machines,
you'll probably want to use one
of the relative reference styles.
Now you've heard me talk about
the fact that your applications
can be localized into multiple
languages with our bundle facilities.
This is where you would do
this in Project Builder.
So we can select a Nib file here,
which is one of the document
files of Interface Builder.
You can see in this case that we've got
an English localized variant of this,
as opposed to it being completely global.
So we can select that
Nib file and say that,
well, actually we'd like to add
a localized variant here.
So, Mike, what should we put here?
Let's try Japanese.
Okay, let's try Japanese.
So we can add a Japanese localized
variant to the file,
and now we've got two
localizations of this Nib file.
So one more thing to note about this,
actually you can also switch things
to be global resources again.
One more thing about the groups
and files outline that you should
know is if you go up to the very
top of the groups and files outline
and select the topmost item,
basically the root group,
in this case Sketch,
now the inspector changes to show that
we're inspecting the project itself.
So I'll touch on this a
bit more later in the talk,
but this is where you would set a build
location for this project specifically,
and I'll talk about why
you might want to do that.
And it's also where you would
select to commit changes for
SCM across the entire project.
Now let's talk about
navigating through the project.
In order to use some of our more
advanced navigation facilities,
you first need to index your project.
So currently with the shipping
versions of Project Builder,
we don't index by default.
So if you wish to index,
you go up to the project menu,
select index project.
This goes through the compiler to
index all the C-based languages,
so C, C++, and Objective-C.
It uses a separate parser for Java.
If you do have any problems indexing in
this current version of Project Builder,
you should go to the
console and look at that.
We aren't currently invoking the
build system in quite the same way as
when we invoke to build your project.
That's something we're going to
be fixing in the next release.
As I mentioned,
the index is then used for some of our
more advanced navigation mechanisms.
But let's talk about
navigation as a whole first.
So for moving around between files,
in the navigation bar
above each editor pane,
we have a pop-up menu to show
the recently viewed files.
So you can move between those.
There's also back and forward buttons,
so you can move back and
forward as in a web browser,
kind of a stack-based there.
You also have easy
access to included files.
So we have what we call the counterpart
button here and an icon on the bottom.
And there's a button on the
right of the navigation bar
that lets you switch between,
in this case,
the class file and the header file
for that particular class file.
So we can move back and forth there.
But if you've indexed your project,
this is a little bit of a hidden feature.
If you hold down the
mouse button on the icon,
the counterpart icon,
that shows all the files
that this file is including.
So we can go from this source
file to one of its header files.
And the other thing is now you can walk
up and down your include hierarchy.
So you can see that this header
file is being included by
two of the source code files.
We can also go to on up the
header hierarchy and say,
well, let me see.
Gee, we're importing appkit.h.
Let me see what all it imports.
And from there,
that's another mechanism to
get to framework headers.
So a way of seeing the header
file dependencies in your project.
For navigating within a file, we have,
again, if the project is indexed,
we've got the symbol pop-up here.
So you can move between different
methods within this file.
And if you're in the source code and
you see a method that you want to see,
say,
let me see the definition of this method.
So shared print info here,
if I want to see the definition of that,
we can do a command,
double-click on that,
and that takes us to the declaration.
If we had multiple declarations
of the same function,
then it would put up a little pop-up
menu if there's a small number of them.
If there's a lot of them,
it would actually populate the
find panel and pop down with that,
and you can select any lines there.
So, I think that covers that.
So, another navigation
mechanism is bookmarks.
These are completely under your control.
Each user has their own set of bookmarks.
So, to set a bookmark in your project,
you would select a line of code and
then go up to the Add to Bookmarks
menu item in the navigation menu.
So, we can add a couple of bookmarks.
Now,
if we go over here to the Bookmarks tab,
we can see that this is a way
of navigating around between
different locations in our project.
So, we can actually rename those by
holding the Option button and clicking.
So, you can,
if you're working on a large project and
you're working on specific parts of it,
you can set up bookmarks to
easily allow you to jump to that.
So, again,
because this is on a per user basis
and multiple users will work on
different aspects of the project,
each person gets their bookmarks
saved persistently with the project.
They can be checked into CVS, et cetera.
Um...
Okay, we also have a project-wide
find and replace capability
here in the find panel.
So there's a lot of
power built into this.
We can control how far we want to search,
so the search space here by
going into the find options.
So you can say I just want
to search in this project,
or I want to search in
all of my open projects,
or I want to search in my projects and
my frameworks or just my frameworks.
So there's a lot of control there.
So you can set up individual find sets.
You can set up individual find
sets however you want for that.
So if we close that back up,
we can see that we've also got different
types of searches that you can do.
So textual or regular expression
for just plain string searches.
If you've indexed your project,
you can do definition searches
as well and switch to finding
the definitions of methods.
So let's look for init with frame.
And we can see here that based on the
find set that we had selected that
we are seeing all the init with frame
methods both from Cocoa framework
headers themselves and from my project.
So when we click on a method
there in the find pane,
it takes us to that implementation
or declaration in the source code.
Okay, so that covers that for
our initial creating,
editing,
and navigating projects walkthrough.
Thanks, Mike.
If we can go back to
slides on both screens,
please.
I generally don't do these things
where I talk all the way through.
Bear with me.
So now let's take a look at some of the
source code navigation or source code
management facilities of Project Builder.
So, currently Project Builder
interfaces with one source code
management system and that's CVS.
You may have heard of
CVS or you may not have.
It's the concurrent versioning system.
This is an open source source code
management system that's used for a lot
of the open source projects out there.
It's cross platforms.
It runs on a whole variety
of different systems,
a lot of different Unix platforms,
Windows NT,
there's clients for the Macintosh.
It comes on the developer tool CD,
so when you install the
developer tools you get CVS.
We use it very extensively
for Mac OS X within Apple,
which for us allows us to
test our Project Builder
interfaces with this very well.
And if you're going to be working
with the Darwin sources at all,
you may already be familiar with
CVS because the Darwin sources are
kept in CVS repositories and you can
access those out on the network and
check out the Darwin sources directly.
time.
So there are some places you
can get documentation for
using CVS in Project Builder.
We put the manual on the system itself
in Developer Documentation Commands,
CVS.
I think we'll have URLs for this
type of thing later up on the web.
Also,
if you go to Project Builder's Help menu,
in the Projects section,
there's a Source Code Management section
there that covers a lot of
what I'm going to talk about.
So in order to use
CVS within Project Builder,
there's some things you have
to do to set up for this first.
Number one is you have to have a
CVS repository somewhere that you're
going to be storing your project in.
Typically there's one CVS repository
for a whole group of developers.
We have about three of them within Apple.
So the Darwin CVS repository,
CoreOS has one,
and then everybody else has one.
You can use either local access
to that and NFS access to that.
CVS looks local.
Or you can use client server
access to a remote CVS repository.
It could even be on a
different type of machine,
but of course you'll want it on Mac OS X.
For remote,
you can use P server authentication
or with the new system,
sorry, I jumped again there.
You can now use
SSH authentication as well.
Another requirement is that your
project already has to be in CVS.
We'll be enhancing some of
these things in the future,
but for now this is the
way that you would use it.
So from the command line
in a terminal window,
for example,
you would do a CVS import on your
project to add it to the repository.
And then you have to check
it back out of the repository
into a CVS working directory.
So on the command line, check it out.
Some people on the email list ask, gee,
Project Builder doesn't seem
to have my SCM menu enabled.
Why is that?
A lot of times it's because you don't
have your project in a working directory.
Maybe you haven't yet put it into CVS.
Those are some of the precursors.
And one thing I forgot on here is that
you actually have to have your CVS root
environment variable set up properly,
I believe.
And that's documented as well.
Once you've done this,
then there's menu items for
committing changes on selected files
or if you have groups selected,
it commits all the changes and files
that have been modified in that group.
If you want to commit
everything in your project,
including the project file itself,
you would select that type.
And then you have that top
level group that I showed in
the groups and files outline.
When you commit,
that makes the addition and
removal of files permanent.
But before CVS knows about the
addition or removal of files,
you have to tell it.
So there's an add to repository menu
item or you can just delete files.
The SEM status of files is shown
in the Groups and Outlines view.
So there's modified.
U means that it's updated out in the
repository and you need to update to it.
Somebody else has changed it.
Question mark means it's
not yet in the repository.
A means that you've added it
and will be committed later.
R means that it's been removed.
So it shows in gray there.
And check my time here.
The C means there's been conflicts.
So you can also compare
different revisions of the
files through file merge.
You can look at the change logs
in the file inspector to see
all the different revisions.
You can compare with the
base revision of a file.
You can compare with the latest revision.
If you're going to be checking in,
nib files from Interface Builder.
Mac OS X in a fair number
of cases use what we call
wrapped files or packages even.
What we do internally within
Apple at this point is use
what's called CVS wrappers.
In order to do this,
there's a configuration file that
we supply in developer tools,
CVS wrappers that you would
need to commit into the top
level of your CVS repository.
And the CVS wrapper is the
one that's going to be used
to build the C++ application.
So you can see the CVS root directory.
In client server mode,
each user needs access to that.
So you put it in a .CVS wrappers
file in your home directory.
This is all documented,
actually in the last
place we documented it,
which was the release
notes for public beta,
which are actually still
in the product as well.
So I'd like to show a quick demo
of source code management and
the comparing of files here.
So bringing Mike back up on stage.
So let's go back into
the Sketch Project here.
And if we open up, say,
our Model Classes group,
We can see here that
when we open this up,
there's a file here marked with a U.
This means that typically we
do check for SCM status when we
open a group for the first time.
Remember the U meant that
somebody outside had modified
the file in the repository.
So we'd really like to see,
I don't really want to update to that
until I know what they've done to it.
So let's go ahead and go to
the SCM menu item and do a
compare with latest revision.
Now this will launch file merge.
And we see in File Merge here that down
in the lower left it shows that there's
been one difference in the file that,
wow, somebody added a new comment.
Well that looks pretty important
so we better update to that.
So now let's go back to the SCM menu and
we can do an update to latest revision.
So bring in what's in the repository.
If there were conflicts in that
update it would show as a C.
You could have used File Merge
to do a merge of that as well.
Let's see.
Demo scripts.
Next time,
now we're going to modify a file.
Yeah, why don't we modify a file?
That's a good idea.
So let's go into Draw Documents
and add an NSLog message here.
So in Cocoa, this is a way,
this is a foundation
call that you can use to,
it's like printouts essentially.
It comes out in the console.
So we can add that.
When we save the file,
we can see that it's now marked
in the Groups and Files outline
as having been modified.
And we can commit that by
going up to the SCM menu item,
Commit Changes, and enter a commit log.
Personally,
I like to commit things in sets.
So things that had the
specific change of one nature,
commit them all together,
have the same commit log and all.
So we can also inspect the
file and see all the different
revisions that we've had here in
the SCM tab of the File Inspector.
We've got essentially seven
revisions since the 1.1.
So let's pick a couple of
those and compare them.
So select a couple arbitrary revisions,
hit Compare, and again this launches
File Merge and shows us the
comparison here in File Merge.
In this case there's 10 differences
and you can move between those.
Okay, so that's it for our SEM demo.
That's File Merge for you.
Now let's talk about configuring,
building and debugging targets.
So what is a target?
Targets are really the face of the
build system in Project Builder.
A target just defines a product to build.
A project consists of
one or more targets,
presumably.
Probably wouldn't be that interesting
to have a project without targets.
Targets can depend on other targets,
and we'll talk about that.
You can have build styles to allow
different variations of the same target.
This is a really innovative capability.
Build phases control when
you're building a project,
a specific target, how does it get built.
I'm not going to go into detail on this.
You can learn lots about this in
Project Builder in depth tomorrow
morning with Mike and the team.
Each user has an active build
style and an active target.
So I might be building,
working on the framework of the project.
You might be working
on the test tool of it,
and he might be working
on the app portion.
When we build,
it's a very simple process.
that might do different
things for each of us.
There's a bunch of
standard types of targets,
so we've talked a lot about apps,
bundles, etc.
You can add as many new targets to a
project as you want by just going to the
New Target menu item in the Project menu.
There's a couple of special
types of targets that we
should highlight a little bit.
We have aggregate targets that
don't build anything themselves,
they just express
dependencies on other targets.
So this can be useful,
let's say that I have a set
of command line tools like
the file commands on Mac OS X.
You can put all those in one project
and have an aggregate that builds them.
It is useful to have that as the
first target and I'll explain
why in a couple of minutes.
You can also have, if you have,
normally Project Builder controls
the build system for you.
You don't ever have to edit
a make file or anything else.
But there's a lot of power to change
that if you wish with the build
phases you can learn about tomorrow.
You can also have targets where you
control the build system or you're
using open source projects and
you don't want to change the build
system that somebody else set up.
You can just create a legacy
make file for that and you can
specify what build tool it is.
It might be make,
but it could be any other
command on the system as well.
So let's look a little bit
more at target dependencies.
So you might have, for example,
if your application is well factored,
you could have an application
and a test tool for it.
So, for example,
Project Builder itself is a small
application that links with a
few large private frameworks
that have all the functionality.
And then we have tools that link
with those frameworks as well.
So in this case we have the My Framework
target represented in the diagram there.
My application depends on My Framework.
My test tool depends on My Framework.
You could select any of those as
your active target and it would
ensure that the framework gets built.
You could also have an aggregate
that depends on all three here.
So the aggregate, again,
the aggregate doesn't
build anything itself,
but it ensures that the others get built.
Having the framework there is
optional from the aggregate because
it'll get built once regardless.
You can configure your target
through the target editor.
We're not going to go
through this in great depth,
but I'll talk about
different aspects of this.
So to set up your build phases,
indicating what files are in your
target and how to process them,
what source files do we compile,
etc., you would go through the files and
build phases aspect of the target editor.
For build settings,
this is where you would control
your compiler and linker options,
things like your optimization settings,
do you want to generate
debug symbols or not,
the install path of your project.
And for advanced capabilities,
there is an expert editor down
there that lets you set any build
variable and values for that.
That can be useful in some circumstances.
The InfoP list that we showed previously
in the new project that we had created,
there's a bundle editor here
or bundle settings that you can
change the different configuration
settings for applications,
for frameworks, for bundles,
for plug-ins.
So you can set, for example,
the identifier that the
preference system would use,
the type and signature for applications.
You can set what the icon is.
This is also where you would set up
what the document types your project,
your application could handle.
So you can set up as a reader or
as an editor of document types.
Or if you just want to put
it out on the pasteboard,
you can set it up with none if you don't
actually handle documents of that type.
Then for the debugging system,
there's a number of things
you can configure about how to
launch your executable here for
either running or debugging.
So let's say that you have a plugin.
So you have a plugin that you're
working on and that's all that's
in your project is a plugin.
Well, we can't just launch that and
have it do anything interesting.
So we have to specify an
application as the context
that that plugin would run in.
This is where you would do that.
You can hear a lot more about that in
the debugging session on Friday morning.
All this ties into a very powerful
build system that does automatic
dependency analysis of your headers.
Again, I've mentioned there's
no make files to edit.
We do leverage a lot of command
line utilities underneath this.
So Jam is a utility
that's a lot like Make.
That's what Project Builder calls,
but very few of you should ever
need to look at Jam files at all.
We talk to a lot of lower
level compiler tools,
so GCC for C-based languages,
Res for .R files,
Java C or Jyx for Java compiling.
If you want lots of access to the
full power of Unix underneath you,
it's there for you,
either in script build
phases that you can put in,
find more about that tomorrow,
or the legacy make file
targets that I talked about.
Where do build results go?
So normally when you hit
build in your project,
it goes into a build
directory in that project.
But you might want to specify a common
build directory for all of your projects.
And this would allow Project Builder
to-- let's say that you had multiple
different projects where you've got
an application in one project and it
depends on three frameworks and you've
got each of those in different projects.
If you set them all up to
build into the same place,
then without actually
installing that on your system,
Project Builder can automatically
configure the dynamic
loader to find all of that,
your development versions
of all of that when you run.
So again,
find more details on Friday about that.
You would set that either for all of your
projects in your building preferences
panel or you might have sets of projects
that you want to work on together.
So put this set over here,
put this set over here when you build.
That's what-- when
inspecting the project,
you might want to set that up.
You can change on each project's
basis where that project builds to
and that's why you would do that.
The compiler,
I'd mentioned that we're using GCC,
so we use GCC 2.95.2 currently.
We build all of Mac OS X with this,
so we've cranked a lot of
code through this compiler,
very heavily tested.
It supports all of our C-based languages,
and as you may have already heard,
we are working on resurrecting Objective
C++ to allow Cocoa applications to take
advantage of existing C++ libraries.
Go to the compiler technology session
with John Graziano and company on
Thursday morning to hear more about that.
You've also got support for
Velocity Engine in the compiler.
C++, GCC is a fairly strict about
its anti-compliance on things.
That's important to know if you're
coming in from other environments.
We've done some performance improvements
for C++ code generation recently,
so we've improved the exception
handling and coalescing of symbols.
So you can get more information about
that again from the compiler session.
We are going to be working with the
latest versions of GCC as it advances.
So one thing that you should
definitely know is that the C++ ABI,
the Application Binary Interface,
is changing between GCC 295 and GCC 3.
So you don't want to have any shared
libraries that export C++ API.
Put a C wrapper around that.
[Transcript missing]
Now I mentioned that Project Builder
has been factored into an
application and some frameworks.
One of the tools that also links with
those frameworks is called PBX Build.
This allows you to do automation
of your builds so you can have a
Unix cron job going nightly to build
all the sources of your project.
Apple does this kind of
thing with all of Mac OS X.
We use PBX Build command
to build everything.
So again,
this uses the same build machinery
as Project Builder itself.
By default, if you just run PBX Build,
it builds the first target in your list.
So this is where having an
aggregate here as the first
target might be useful to you.
If you want to make sure that all
or most of your project gets built.
The invocations of this look
just like invoking make.
So PBX Build clean or PBX Build install.
So if you're going to set things
up to actually put them in to
the install places you want,
we don't currently have a way
of doing this from the IDE.
You would do this from the command line.
Some people ask us,
well why does it build into /temp?
Well, we don't think it's a good thing
to by default build what could be
a buggy product directly into the
install directories on your system.
So we put it in /temp
and the hierarchy there.
If you want it installed
directly when you build,
set destroot equals slash.
For debugging,
we have an extensible architecture
that talks to GDB for debugging
all the C-based languages,
talks to the Java VM for debugging Java.
It's full graphical
source level debugging,
so threads, stack traces, variables.
You can have breakpoints that
are saved on a per user basis.
They're saved not only between
different runs of the debugger,
but between different runs
of the IDE as a whole.
And again, I talked about how the
Project Builder system controls
the dynamic loader to use multiple
projects at a time for debugging.
So development versions
of your frameworks.
And for those of you who
aren't familiar with GDB,
it's a very powerful open source
debugger that comes with the
Mac OS X development tools,
handles all your C-based languages.
You can handle arbitrary expression
evaluation or invoke functions
to get the values of open source.
And it's also able to set opaque
data types such as those from Carbon.
You can set commands and
conditions on breakpoints.
And it's got a very
powerful macro capability.
Again,
the debugger session on Friday morning,
you can learn lots more
about not only C language
debugging from Project Builder,
but Java as well.
And lots about advanced features of GDB.
So I'd like to show you some quick rounds
of building and debugging demo here.
So we can switch back to demo six,
I believe it is.
So if we go back and bring
up that Sketch project again,
We had previously made some
changes to the project,
so let's go ahead and build it and
see what we've got at this point.
So we hit Build.
The project was previously compiled,
so in this case we do an incremental
build with just the SKT draw document.
We can close up the Build tab here
because we got a successful build.
Now let's go ahead and run.
So we can hit the little monitor
icon there to run the application.
So it fires up,
brings it to the foreground,
but we can see that in
the run tool pane here,
we got the console output from the NS log
message that we had previously put in.
So great.
But let's actually take
a look at debugging.
So let's quit out of this at
this point and let's say that
we want to debug the project.
Now by default,
when you build within Project Builder,
it assumes that you're doing development.
So it builds for debugging.
That's why some of you
look at it and say,
"Why is my executable so large?" That's
because it's got debugging symbols
in it until you build for deployment,
which we'll find more
about that tomorrow.
So... Sorry, I got ahead of myself here.
Okay,
so what I'd like to do is I remember that
there were some issues there with the...
Align Left Edges methods of Sketch.
So let's go and find
that method in the code.
We select the source for that and
we can put a breakpoint here on that
by clicking in the breakpoint well.
Actually,
why don't you bring up the breakpoints
tab and just show that so now you can
see where the breakpoint is listed there.
You can enable or disable it.
Let's go ahead and go
back into the application.
[Transcript missing]
fires up GDB on it and
launches the project.
So now we can draw a few objects here.
Couple objects and do a select all
and then go and say align left edges.
Boom, we hit the break point.
Now we can see a variety of
things here shown in the debugger.
We can see that we've got the
stack back trace where we stopped.
So you can see some stack frames are
shown in bold and some are in gray.
So we have source code for
those that are shown in bold.
For the ones in gray,
they're in the frameworks.
We don't have source code for that.
We've got a threads pop-up to show the
different threads in your application.
Most Mac OS X applications
have more than one thread,
although keep it minimal.
We've got variable inspection here
for all your different variable types.
In the May 2001 tool CD,
you can now set the values of variables
when you're debugging in Java,
and we have worked on that for C as well.
If we start stepping
through the code here,
we can see that variables
start to turn red if they've
changed in the previous step.
So we can go down and look
at first bounds and say,
"Okay, here's a structure." We can see
the contents of that structure.
When we step over the line here
that's going to set first bounds,
it shows us that all the values
of the structure had changed.
And if we step through a little bit,
for Cocoa programming,
seeing the description of an
object is a very important thing.
So if you want to do that,
what you have to do currently
is bring down the GDB console,
do a PO for Cocoa.
Do a print object of a particular object.
So in this case, Curr graphic.
We can print the object there.
We'll be providing better user
interface for this as well.
And again, the debugging session will go
into more detail on these things.
And then if we were to
step around the loop,
we'd see it continue to
increment the loop variables.
So we can see that now I is on value two,
for example.
Okay?
So that's it for that demo.
Thanks, Mike.
Okay, let's take a look at what's on the
May 2001 Developer Tools CD that
you just got in your packet.
Some of you probably had
high expectations that,
"Ooh,
I hope my pet feature is fixed." Well,
we've got full support for
WebObjects 5 development here,
so you can still do all your
other development as well.
But the primary theme again
was WebObjects 5 for both
Project Builder and Interface Builder.
The WebObjects 5 developer
packages themselves are included
on the CD this time around.
We don't plan to do that in the future,
but we'll give exposure
to WebObjects this time.
There's also a limited
version of the runtime,
so it's a time-limited,
restricted version of the
runtime that you can test your
WebObjects applications with.
There's new system documentation.
There's some additional
examples for AppKit,
like I think one for the use of the app.
There's also some examples
for the NS Toolbar.
And then some Interface
Builder examples as well that
Henri will probably talk about.
On the Project Builder enhancements,
it's been localized into Japanese.
General purpose enhancements,
you can now continue your build after
there's been an error in one file.
So it can go off and continue to
try to compile all your other files.
That's on the building preferences.
There's a check syntax check
mark in the right portion of the
navigation bar with which you can do,
essentially,
a single file compile check to make sure
that you're using the syntax correctly.
I talked about the precompiled,
implicitly included header files.
That's in what you've just received.
There's build support for
HeaderDoc and some bug fixes as well.
I talked about enhancements for
Java so you can now merge JAR files
automatically during the build process.
There were a couple of problems with
building large projects for Java,
hitting command line length
restrictions and things like that.
Those have been fixed.
And build performance improvements.
So if you've indexed your
project and you're getting,
therefore getting
Java dependency analysis,
we now are again throwing multiple
files at the compiler at the same time
which processes them more quickly.
There's build support for Java wrappers.
So this is a Java wrapper
around Objective-C frameworks.
And I mentioned that you can set
values when you're debugging Java.
[Transcript missing]
So yeah,
those of you who have used Help Viewer
to try to access developer documentation,
you can sometimes see that it
might be nice to have faster,
more flexible viewing there.
And then some underlying support.
I talked about Objective C++.
One other thing we're working on
is two-level namespace supports
in the linker and loader that
will let us add new APIs to our
frameworks without breaking your
applications by conflicting with that.
So you can find out more about
that in the compiler session.
So let's talk about the
class browser a little bit.
So Cocoa is a very big framework
that's new to a lot of people.
It's really not hard
to learn Objective C,
the language.
But learning the frameworks
is always the hard part.
What can we do to help you there?
So that's what a class
browser can help with.
For example,
where is this class in the hierarchy?
What's inherited, etc.? Let's see a demo.
So if we can switch back to demo, great.
So going over to the other
machine that's got the special
sneak preview version here,
we can see that we've now got
a fifth tab here in the project
structure tabs on the left.
So a classes tab that
when we bring this over,
we can see that it's got the NSObject
and NSProxy root classes for Cocoa.
So we can navigate down in and see all
the different subclasses of NSObject.
We can scroll down through that and see,
for example, NSResponder.
We might want to look at what's in that.
And we can see that NSView here.
So scrolling on down
a little bit further,
we can see, oh, hey, look,
there's some classes
highlighted in bold here.
Now that indicates that they're classes
that are actually in your project
as opposed to in the frameworks.
So we can click on a class and we can
see the members that are defined there.
Click on one of the members and we
can see the declaration of that.
So that's pretty cool.
But let's say that I knew
the name of the class,
but I didn't know where
it was in the hierarchy.
Well we've got some options you can
set up down here in a pop-up to say,
let's say, let's look at a flat
listing of all the classes.
So now we see this all alphabetical,
but wow,
that's still kind of overwhelming.
Why don't you just show me
my project classes for now?
And I see a list of just
the projects in my class.
So we can select one of those,
say SKT Image, and we can flip back to
the hierarchy here now.
And it shows us, wow, okay,
that's a subclass of SKT graphic
and you can look back
through the class hierarchy.
So if we were to
Take a look at, I believe, next.
See the inherited members.
Inherited members, yes.
So if we look at the options,
there's a lot of power
in this options panel.
There's how you would set up the
different option sets for the pop-up.
You can configure that.
We'll have some default sets.
There's a Show Inherited
Members checkbox here.
So if we check that,
now we can see that in gray,
we're seeing all the members that we're
inheriting from the frameworks classes.
So, but what are these book
icons next to some of these?
Let's take a look at one of those, Mike.
So we click on the book for
the class method and boom,
the HTML documentation for NSObject
shows up right here in Project Builder.
So we can also,
because we had previously showed that
files can be opened in separate windows,
let's take a look at NS Bezier
path off in a separate window.
How would we do that?
Let's just go down,
double click on the book icon
for set default line join style.
And off into a separate window,
the HTML comes up.
So you can copy and paste
out of this multi-window.
We're really working to integrate this
seamlessly and well into Project Builder.
So it's not ready to ship yet,
but we think you'll like it
when it gets fully there.
Okay, thanks Mike.
So what else is on the drawing board?
Well, one of the things we've heard
loud and clear is that some of
you would like more flexible UI.
So, for example,
we showed the tools panes coming
down in the project window.
It might be nice to be able to have those
outside of the window and in general
have a more flexible multi-window UI.
Yes, we've heard that.
And yes, we'll be working on that.
Other things,
plug-in editors and plug-in build tools.
We've been migrating the project
towards that capability already.
So the documentation viewing
that you just saw is actually
implemented as an editor plug-in.
This is letting us get the
APIs to a state where in a
bit we'll be able to bring on,
make those APIs more public.
We're looking for tighter integration
with other tools such as Interface
Builder and the performance tools so
the ability to directly launch malloc
debug or sampler or object alloc on your
application from within Project Builder.
And then on the compiler side of things,
we need to do a lot of work on faster
C++ compilation and we are also working
on code generation improvements as well.
So in summary,
Project Builder is a very powerful idea.
We're working hard to
improve it in a lot of ways.
We've got a great team working
on this and we're continuing
to build up that team.
Send us your feedback.
Many of you already have been.
And most important,
finish up and ship your applications.
So with that,
that finishes up what I had to say.
There's a variety of
information pages out here.
I'd like to bring Godfrey
back on the stage for what
remaining Q&A time we have.
Thank you very much, Dave.
I think we need a big hand for
Dave and the Project Builder team.
I think the advancements we're making
with Project Builder are more than just
impressive and that it's going to be
a tremendous tool for all of your use.
This is just a roadmap to all the further
tools-related sessions through the show.
We felt that in this session it was
useful to give this to you again so
you have an idea where we're going.
The next session in this hall
is Interface Builder and we'll
be doing a similar presentation.
And now let's kind of walk through these.
That's my information in
case you need to contact us.
The Mac OS Tools feedback mailing
address sends information to all of the
development team on a one-by-one basis,
feature requests, feature enhancements.
Remember also to file bugs.
When you run into bugs,
use the bug reporter.
It's fully accessible for this project.